>> Ifill: TENSIONS RISE IN
JERUSALEM.
AS ISRAEL LIFTS THE
CONTROVERSIAL CLOSURE OF A HOLY
SITE AND FRESH VIOLENCE BETWEEN
ISRAELIS AND PALESTINIANS HOLDS
THE THREAT OF MORE YET TO COME.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD TH THUISRSDAY, IN
ALASKA'S SENATE RACE,
AUTHENTICITY REIGNS SUPREME FOR
VOTERS WARY OF OUTSIDER
INTERESTS.
>> SOME DEGREE THAT'S TRUE OF
THE OIL INDUSTRY, ABOUT THE
AUTHENTICITY OF THE PEOPLE WHO
>> Ifill: PLUS, SOLAR FLARES AND
LAVA FLOWS THE HOT SPOTS ON
EARTH AND IN OUTER-SPACE.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. ECONOMY
HAS TURNED IN ANOTHER SOLID
QUARTER.
GROWTH FROM JULY THROUGH
SEPTEMBER RAN AT AN ANNUAL RATE
OF 3.5%.
THAT FOLLOWS AN EVEN STRONGER
SECOND QUARTER, AND FALLING GAS
PRICES ARE EXPECTED TO HELP KEEP
THE TREND GOING THROUGH THE REST
OF THE YEAR.
WE'LL LOOK AT HOW THE ECONOMY IS
AFFECTING THE MID-TERM
ELECTIONS, LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
THAT UPBEAT GROWTH REPORT PUSHED
STOCKS HIGHER ON WALL STREET
TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 221 POINTS TO CLOSE
17,195; THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY
17 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,566; AND
THE S&P ADDED 12 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 1,994.
>> Ifill: A NURSE FROM MAINE
WHO'S RETURNED FROM WEST
AFRICA'S EBOLA ZONE, DEFIED A
VOLUNTARY QUARANTINE TODAY.
KACI HICKOX TOOK A BIKE RIDE
WITH HER BOYFRIEND IN FORT KENT,
MAINE.
SHE'D RETURNED THERE MONDAY
AFTER SPENDING THREE DAYS IN
FORCED ISOLATION IN NEW JERSEY.
SHE'S SAID SHE'S FREE OF
SYMPTOMS.
MAINE OFFICIALS ARE PURSUING A
COURT ORDER TO KEEP HICKOX AT
HOME UNTIL THE INCUBATION PERIOD
FOR THE VIRUS ENDS.
>> Ifill: THERE ARE NEW WARNINGS
ABOUT THE EBOLA OUTBREAK IN
SIERRA LEONE.
THE NEW HEAD OF THE COUNTRY'S
RESPONSE CENTER SAID TODAY THE
CRISIS IS GETTING WORSE AND THAT
EFFORTS TO FIGHT THE DISEASE ARE
THREE MONTHS BEHIND.
THAT'S ONE DAY AFTER OFFICIALS
REPORTED THE RATE OF INFECTION
IN NEIGHBORING LIBERIA APPEARS
TO BE SLOWING.
>> Woodruff: A DIFFERENT CRISIS
GRIPPED ANOTHER WEST AFRICAN
NATION TODAY.
THE PRESIDENT OF BURKINA FASO,
WHO'S RULED FOR 27 YEARS,
DECLARED AN EMERGENCY AFTER
PROTESTERS STORMED PARLIAMENT.
THEY SET THE BUILDING ON FIRE
AND FROM THERE THOUSANDS MOVED
ON TO ATTACK THE HOMES OF
GOVERNMENT MINISTERS.
THE PRESIDENT DECLARED A STATE
OF EMERGENCY AND DROPPED OUT OF
SIGHT.
>> Ifill: FIGHTING HAS FLARED
AGAIN IN UKRAINE DESPITE A
CEASE-FIRE.
THE COUNTRY'S MILITARY SAYS
SEVEN OF ITS SOLDIERS WERE
KILLED IN THE LAST 24 HOURS, IN
THE EASTERN PART OF THE COUNTRY.
THAT'S THE MOST IN TWO WEEKS.
GOVERNMENT TROOPS AND PRO-
RUSSIAN REBELS HAVE CLASHED
REPEATEDLY SINCE SEPTEMBER
FIFTH, WHEN THE TRUCE WAS
SIGNED.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED A NEW RULE
GOVERNING FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES
WHOSE STUDENTS CAN'T FIND JOBS
THAT LET THEM PAY OFF THEIR
FEDERAL LOANS.
THEY'LL HAVE TO SHOW THAT A
GRADUATE'S ESTIMATED ANNUAL LOAN
PAYMENT DOES NOT EXCEED 8% OF
TOTAL EARNINGS.
THE EFFORT TARGETS "CAREER
SCHOOLS" THAT SOAK UP TUITION AI
BUT PROVIDE LITTLE USEFUL
TRAINING.
>> Woodruff: THE MAYOR WHO LED
BOSTON THROUGH THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS, THOMAS
MENINO, DIED TODAY AFTER
BATTLING CANCER.
MENINO WAS HAILED FOR UNITING
THE CITY AFTER THE BOMB ATTACK
KILLED THREE PEOPLE AND WOUNDED
MORE THAN 260 IN APRIL.
>> THERE'S GOING TO BE A LOT OF
HELP NEEDED FOR THEM.
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT BOSTON IS
ALL ABOUT.
WE'RE ONE CITY COMMITTED TO
MAKING A BETTER CITY IN ORDER
FOR PEOPLE TO NOT TO FORGET AS
YOU GO FURTHER DOWN THE ROAD.
>> Woodruff: MENINO RETIRED
EARLIER THIS YEAR, AFTER SERVING
FIVE TERMS AS MAYOR.
HE WAS 71-YEARS-OLD.
>> Ifill: THE ACCLAIMED POET
GALWAY KINNELL WAS REMEMBERED
TODAY FOR HIS LONG AWARD-WINNING
CAREER.
HE DIED TUESDAY OF LEUKEMIA AT
87.
KINNELL FIRST GAINED NOTICE IN
THE EARLY 1960'S AND CONTINUED
PUBLISHING FOR DECADES.
ALONG THE WAY HE WON A PULITZER
PRIZE AND A NATIONAL BOOK AWARD
FOR SUCH WORKS AS "BODY RAGS"
AND "MORL ATACTS, MORTAL WORDS."
>> Woodruff: AND THE SAN
FRANCISCO GIANTS RETUNED HOME
EARLY TODAY AFTER WINNING THE
WORLD SERIES FOR THE THIRD TIME
IN FIVE YEARS.
FANS GREETED THE TEAM BUS WHEN
ROLLED INTO AT&T PARK BEFORE
DAWN AND THE CLUB'S C.E.O. TOOK
THE TROPHY FOR A VICTORY LAP.
HOURS EARLIER, THE GIANTS BEAT
THE KANSAS CITY ROYALS IN GAME
SEVEN, THREE TO TWO.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
TENSIONS IN JERUSALEM RISE AFTER
ISRAELI POLICE SHOOT A
PALESTINIAN MAN.
THE TIGHT SENATE RACE IN THE
LAST FRONTIER: ALASKA.
THE IMPACT A SLOW ECONOMIC
RECOVERY MAY HAVE ON THE MIDTERM
ELECTIONS.
AN UPDATE ON THE EBOLA CRISIS IN
LIBERIA.
APPLE C.E.O. TIM CK COOOMES OUT.
THE SCIENCE OF SUN SPOTS AND
LAVA FLOWS.
AND, THE PLAYWRITE BEHIND THE
PULITZER PRIZE WINNING DRAMA
ABOUT IDENTITY AND ISLAM.
>> Woodruff: IT'S ONE OF THE
HOLIEST SITES TO THE WORLD'S
THREE MAJOR RELIGIONS.
KNOWN TO JEWS AND CHRISTIANS AS
THE TEMPLE MOUNT, IT'S ALSO HOME
TO THE AL-AQSA MOSQUE, ONE OF
THE MOST SACRED IN ISLAM.
NOW IT HAS BECOME GROUND ZERO
FOR ATHERNO ROUND OF FIGHTING
BETWEEN PALESTINIANS AND ISRAELI
SECURITY FORCES.
THEY WERE TRIGGERED WHEN ISRAELI
POLICE CORNERED AND KILLED A
PALESTINIAN MAN.
HE WAS SUSPECTED OF SERIOUSLY
WOUNDING A FAR-RIGHT JEWISH
ACTIVIST WHO HAD DEMANDED
GREATER ACCESS TO THE PLACE JEWS
CALL THE TEMPLE MOUNT, AND
MUSLIMS KNOW AS AL AQSA.
ADMIST THE TROUBLE, THE ISRAELIS
CLOSED THE SITE FOR THE FIRST
TIME SINCE 2000.
THAT BROUGHT CONDEMNATION FROM
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS.
THROUGH AN AIDE, HE  CHARGED THE
CLOSURE WAS "TANTAMOUNT TO A
DECLARATION OF WAR."
>> ( translated ): WE CONDEMN
AND REFUSE THE ISRAELI
ESCALATION IN JERUSALEM AND OVER
THE HOLY SHRINES.
WE WILL TAKE ALL LEGAL MEASURES
TO HOLD ISRAEL ACCOUNTABLE AND
TO STOP THESE REPEATED ATTACKS,
BECAUSE THE CONTINUATION OF
ISRAELI AGGRESSION AND DANGEROUS
ESCALATION WILL CAUSE MORE
VIOLENCE.
>> Woodruff: HOURS LATER, ISRAEL
ANNOUNCED IT WILL RE-OPEN
THE SITE TO WORSHIPPERS.
BUT ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU BLAMED ABBAS
FOR STARTING THE TROUBLE, WITH A
RECENT CALL TO BAN JEWS FROM THE
COMPOUND.
>> ( translated ): I STILL HAVE
NOT HEARD FROM THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY SO MUCH AS ONE WORD OF
CONDEMNATION FOR THIS
INCITEMENT.
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
NEEDS TO STOP ITS HYPOCRISY AND
TAKE ACTION AGAINST INCITERS,
AGAINST THOSE WHO TRY TO CHANGE
THE STATUS QUO.
I HAVE ORDERED SIGNIFICANT
REINFORCEMENTS, INCLUDING
REINFORCEMENT OF RESOURCES, SO
THAT WE CAN MAINTAIN BOTH
SECURITY IN JERUSALEM AND THE
STATUS QUO IN THE HOLY PLACES.
>> Woodruff: ALL OF THIS COMES
AS TENSIONS ARE STILL RUNNING
HIGH OVER THE SUMMER WAR IN GAZA
BETWEEN ISRAEL AND HAMAS
MILITANTS.
ISRAEL HAS ALSO ANNOUNCED PLANS
FOR MORE SETTLEMENT-BUILDING IN
EAST JERUSALEM, A MOVE THAT'S
INFLAMED PALESTINIANS AND BEEN
DENOUNCED BY U.S. OFFICIALS.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THESE
TENSIONS AND WHAT'S BEHIND THEM
I'M JOINED BY HUSSEIN IBISH OF
THE AMERICAN TASK FORCE ON
PALESTINE.
AND, DAVID MAKOVSKY, FROM THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE, HE WAS
PART OF SECRATERY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY'S NEGOTIATING TEAM IN THE
MOST RECENT TALKS.
WELCOME BACK TO THE PROGRAM.
TO BOTH OF YOU.
DAVID MAKOVSKY, FIRST, HOW
SIGNIFICANT ARE THESE TENSIONS
WE'RE WATCHING?
>> LOOK, YOU KNOW, THIS IS A
CONFLICT THE
ISRAELIS-PALESTINIAN CONFLICT
THAT DOESN'T LACK FOR EMOTION
AND PASSION, AND JERUSALEM, ON
TOP OF IT, HAS EVEN MORE DOSES
THAN ANYTHING ELSE.
SO WE'VE SEEN EPISODE WHERE
THINGS HAVE FLARED AND THEN
THINGS HAVE KIND OF QUIETED
DOWN.
SO IT'S HARD TO KNOW FOR SURE.
BUT I THINK WE NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT COOL HEADS PREVAIL HERE
BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT THIS
CONFLICT THAT'S A POLITICAL
CONFLICT-- ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN--
TO BE TRANSFORMED INTO A
MUSLIM-JEWISH RELIGIOUS WAR.
BECAUSE POLITICAL CONFLICTS YOU
CAN SOLVE.
BUT RELIGIOUS WARS YOU CAN'T.
>> Woodruff: HOW CONCERNED ARE
YOU?
>> I THINK IT'S VERY DANGEROUS.
I THINK WE'RE CLOSER TO SEEING
A-- THE PROCESS OF THE
DEVELOPMENT OF ANOTHER INTIFADA
THAN WE HAVE BEEN SINCE 2005.
IT WAS 10 YEARS AGO WHEN THE
SECOND INTFAHDA PETERED OUT.
I DON'T THINK IT'S UPON US AND I
DON'T THINK IT'S LIKELY TO BE
PRODUCED IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS
BUT I THINK YOU CAN SEE THE
ELEMENTS COMING TOGETHER,
PARTICULARLY CLUTTERED AROUND
EAST JERUSALEM WITH THE QUESTION
OF THE SETTLEMENTS AND THE
QUESTION OF HOLY PLACES YOU YOU
HAVE THE EXACT NEXUS OF ISSUES
AND THE PLACE CONSIDER THAT KIND
OF EXPLOSION OR IMPLOSION COULD
COME ABOUT.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONEDLY
THE SETTLEMENTS.
DAVID MAKOVSKY, THESE NEW
SETTLEMENTS, THE NEW
CONSTRUCTION, HOW MUCH OF A
STICKING POINT, HOW MUCH OF AN
IRRITANT IS THAT?
>> I AGREE WITH HUSSAIN, WHEN
YOU HAVE A VACUUM-- WE WERE LED
BY SECRETARY KERRY'S INITIATIVE.
PEOPLE THOUGHT OKAY THERE WAS AN
EFFORT TO TRY TO SOLVE THIS, BUT
WHEN THERE'S NO EFFORT, WHEN
THERE'S A VACUUM, ALL SORT OF
THINGS BUBBLE UP, AND I THINK
THAT CAPACKER BASE THE CONCERNS.
>> Woodruff: YOU MEAN THE FACT
THAT THE TALKS COLLAPSED LAST
SPRING.
>> EXACTLY.
LOOK, THESE NEIGHBORHOODS IN
JERUSALEM, I MEAN, I DON'T WANT
TO BORE PEOPLE WITH ALL THE
TECHNICALITIES, BUT THERE'S A
SIX PHASES OF PLANNING.
SO THIS IS RECYCLED NEWS FROM
2010.
AND THERE'S GOING TO BE ANOTHER
FOUR MORE OF THESE ANNOUNCEMENTS
PROBABLY OVER THE NEXT FEW YEARS
OVER THE SAME FEW APARTMENT
BUILDINGS.
THE PROBLEM IS THIS-- NETANYAHU
WILL SAY IN THESE PARTICULAR
NEIGHBORHOODS, AREAS THAT EVEN
PALESTINIAN MAPS, NOT ALL OF
THEM, BY THE WAY, BUT SOME OF
THEM WILL BE ISRAEL ANYWAY.
BUT WHEN YOU DON'T SAY THE
COROLLARY OF, WELL, I WON'T
BUILD IN THE OTHER AREAS THAT
WILL BE PALESTINE, PEOPLE ASSUME
THE WORST.
IF YOU DON'T DRAWLET
DISTINCTION, THEY WON'T DRAW THE
DISTINCTION.
SO I THINK THERE'S A NEED TO DO
BOTH SIDE OF THIS.
YOU'RE GOING TO BUILD THERE
SAYING THAT'S GOING TO BE ISRAEL
ANYWAY IN A TWO-STATE PEACE MAP,
THEN YOU HAVE TO SAY WHERE
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO BUILD.
>> Woodruff: IS IT JUST A
MATTER OF HOW IT'S TALKED ABOUT
I DON'T THINK SO.
>> I CERTAINLY AGREE THE
SETTLEMENTS HAVE NOT BEEN BUILT,
AND THERE IS A MULTISTRAIJ
PLANNING PROCESS SO YOU PAY THE
COST POLITICALLY MANY TIMES OVER
EACH TIME IT'S ANNOUNCED.
BUT IT IS NOT A CONSCIOUS AREA.
IT'S ONE OF THE NEW SETTLEMENTS
ANNOUNCED AND THAT'S THE ONE
THAT'S PROBABLY THE BIGGEST
SINGLE IRRITANT BETWEEN THE
UNITED STATES AND ISRAEL AND THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY AND
ISRAEL.
BUT ALL OF THESE SEND A MESSAGE
TO THE PALESTINIANS AND THE
OTHER ARABS THAT ISRAEL INTENDS
TO KEEP HOLD OF JERUSALEM, THAT
ISRAEL DOESN'T WANT TO
COMPROMISE ON JERUSALEM BECAUSE
IF YOU REALLY DID WANT A
TWO-STATE SOLUTION, WHY KEEP
DIGGING THE HOLE DEEPER?
WHY KEEP EXPANDING THE NUMBER OF
SETTLERS AND THE AREAS THAT ARE
SETTLED, ESPECIALLY IN STRATEGIC
AREAS THAT CUT OFF JERUSALEM
FROM THE REST OF THE WEST BANK?
THAT'S A QUESTION I'VE NEVER HAD
A GOOD ANSWER TO.
>> Woodruff: IS THERE A
CALMING INFLUENCE OUT THERE THAT
COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE IN
GETTING THINGS TO COOL DOWN,
DAVID MAKOVSKY?
>> I THINK THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION.
I THINK WHAT'S KEY IS, YOU KNOW,
NETANYAHU SAID STATUS QUO.
HE'S REALLY, I THINK, COMING OUT
AGAINST THE PEOPLE WHO WANT TO
GO ON THE TEMPLE MOUNT AND READY
IT'S THE SECURITY CHIEFS WHO
SAY, "HEY, THIS IS A POWDER KEG,
PEOPLE."
AND EACH ONE HAS GOOD ARGUMENTS.
WILL SAY, YOU KNOW, THIS IS THE
HOLIEST SITE IS THE TWO--
SOLOMON'S TEMPLE AND THE RUINS
OF THE MOSQUE OF THE TEMPLES IS
WHERE THE MOSQUE IS.
HISTORY HAS-- WHEN THE AREA
BECAME OOFS TAKEN BY ISRAEL IN
1967, MOSHE DIANE, WHO WAS THE
WINNING GENERAL SAID, YOU KNOW,
WHAT, JORDANIAN RELIGIOUS
AUTHORITIES, YOU ADMINISTERED
THIS BEFORE THE WAR.
YOU ADMINISTER IT NOW.
ISRAEL'S NOT DOING IT.
AND THE RABBENET, SAID DON'T GO
UP TO THERE, NOT BECAUSE IT'S
NOT HOLY, BECAUSE IT'S TOO HOLY.
WAIT FOR THE MESSIAH.
BUT WHAT HAPPENED IS THIS NEW
INSURGENT GROUP SAYS HE NOW CAN
HISTORICALLY DELINEATE THROUGH
ARCHAEOLOGY WHERE IT IS, AND
THAT'S UPSETTING THE STATUS QUO.
THE MESSAGE OF THE SECURITY
SERVICES, KEEP THE STATUS QUO.
MAKE SURE THIS POWDER KEG
DOESN'T GO OFF.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU SEE
THIS?
>> I THINK THERE ARE IMPORTANT
CALMING ELEMENTS HERE THAT COULD
BE-- CERTAINLY THE UNITED STATES
AND THE REST OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY CAN
HELP
WITH INCENTIVES AND
DISINCENTIVES TO THE PARTIES TO
CALM THINGS DOWN.
WE CAN PLAY A SIGNIFICANT ROLE
IN ENCOURAGING THE PARTIES TO DO
THAT.
IN ADDITION, I THINK THE PUBLIC
SENTIMENT--
>> Woodruff: EVEN WITH THE
TALKS STOPPED?
>> YES, EVEN WITH THE-- YES,
BECAUSE THERE ARE STILL
BILATERAL RELATIONS, AND
CERTAINLY WE DID HAVE THIS
INTERESTING TAKE BY JEFFREY
GOLDBERG THIS WEEK ABOUT HOW
THERE'S A DETERIORATION.
HE DISCUSSED WHITE-HOT ANGER
AGAINST ISRAEL AND NETANYAHU'S
CONTEMPT, AS HE PUT IT, FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION.
BUT THAT DOESN'T MATTER.
THERE ARE STILL BILATERAL
RELATIONS AND ALSO BILATERAL
RELATIONS WITH THE PALESTINIANS
WHICH COULD BE UTILIZEED TO CALM
THINGS DOWN.
I THINK THE PUBLIC, ESPECIALLY
IF IT'S GIVEN REASONS TO HOPE
AND REASONS TO CHOOSE TO CALM
DOWN, CAN BE HELPFUL ON BOTH
SIDES, AND PARTICULARLY THE
PALESTINIAN PUBLIC HAS SHOWN A
RETICENCE TO GET STUCKED INTO
ANOTHER INTIFADA.
THIS SUMMER, DURING THE GAZA
WAR, THERE WAS A MAJOR INCIDENT
AT A CHECKPOINT NEAR A REFUGEE
CAMP, DURING A VERY HOLY NIGHT
DURING RAMADAN, AND THE PUBLIC
BACKED OFF AND DIDN'T GO FOR IT.
IF THE PUBLIC CAN BE GIVEN
REASONS TO HOPE FOR SOMETHING
BETTER TOMORROW, I DON'T THINK
THEY'RE GOING TO BE INTERESTED
IN GOING DOWN THIS ROAD.
THIS WOULD BE PURE LAST-DITCH
DESPERATION AND ANGER.
>> Woodruff: HUSSEIN IBISH,
DAVID MAKOVSKY, WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE ARE NOW FIVE DAYS
FROM THE MIDTERM ELECTION AND
THE FATE OF THE U.S. SENATE IS
IN THE HANDS OF A FEW KEY STATES
WITH TOSS-UP RACES.
AMONG THEM IS ALASKA, WITH A
SENATE RACE THAT TOUCHES ON THE
STATE'S HISTORY AND IDENTITY.
AS PART OF OUR PROJECT WITH
PUBLIC BROADCASTERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, LIZ RUSKIN OF ALASKA
PUBLIC MEDIA TAKES US TO THE
LAST FRONTIER.
>> Reporter: THIS VAST STATE
IS THE SETTING FOR ONE OF THE
MOST COMPETITIVE ?EET RACES THIS
YEAR, A RACE ABOUT THE IDENTITY
OF THIS PLACE AND WHICH MAN BEST
REPRESENTS ITS FUTURE.
>> BETWEEN NOW AND ELECTION DAY,
I WILL WORK EVERY SINGLE HOUR.
>> Reporter: THE INCUMBENT IS
DEMOCRAT MARK BEGGISM, FORMER
MAYOR OF ANCHORAGE.
HIS FATHER SERVED IN CONGRESS
BUT DIED WHEN MARK WAS 10.
NICK BEGITCH WAS RUNNING FOR HIS
SECOND TERM IN 1972 WHEN HIS
PLANE DISAPPEARED OVER THE
ALASKA WILDERNESS.
NOW HIS SON IS RUNNING HARD FOR
HIS SECOND TERM.
>> MORE THAN ANY OTHER--
>> EVERYBODY-- EVERYBODY KNOWS
THIS IS IT, RIGHT HERE.
THE CONTROL OF THE U.S. SENATE.
>> YOU BET.
>> Reporter: CHALLENGER DAN
SULLIVAN WAS RAISE RAISED IN SUN
CLEVELAND.
IN LAW SCHOOL, HE FELL IN LOVE
WITHIN AN ALASKAN AND MOVED TO
HER HOME STATE.
HE'S EYE FORMER STATE ATTORNEY
GENERAL AND A CURRENT RESERVIST
OFFICER IN THE MARINES.
THIS IS HIS FIRST RUN FOR
ELECTED OFFICE.
>> PEOPLE WANT TO KNOW YOU'RE
HERE FOR LEGITIMATE PURPOSES.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL CARRIE
HAS WRITTEN ABOUT STATE POLITICS
FOR DECADES.
HE SAYS SUCCESSFUL CANDIDATES
HERE MUST PROVE THEY BELONG IN
ALASKA.
>> ALASKA HAS A LONG HISTORY OF
BEING RULED BY OUTSIDERS-- SOME
PARTS IT'S BEEN THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT.
AFTER ALL, WE WERE A TERRITORY.
SO THERE'S ALSO BANE QUESTION,
AND TO SOME DEGREE, THAT'S TRUE
NOW WITH THE OIL INDUSTRY, ABOUT
THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE PEOPLE
WHO ARE HERE AND WHOSE INTERESTS
THEY ARE SERVING.
ARE THEY REALLY ALASKANS OR ARE
THEY JUST HERE TO GET THE MONEY
AND LEAD?
>> THERE'S A THIRD CHARACTER IN
THIS RACE, BARACK OBAMA, THE
PRESIDENT IS EXTREMELY UNPOPULAR
IN ALASKA.
THE SULLIVAN CAMP IS WORKING
HARD TO MAKE SURE ALASKANS SEE
BEGICH, AND OBAMA AS TEAMMATES.
AMANDA COYNE COVERS ALASKA
POLITICS ON A WEB SITE CARRYING
HER NAME.
SHE SAYS OBAMA IS AN EFFECTIVE
FOIL BECAUSE HE REPRESENTS
UNWELCOME, OUTSIDE POWER.
>> YOU KNOW, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
OBAMA HERE, BUT I THINK THAT
REALLY WE HAVE TO TALK ABOUT THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY AS A WHOLE.
IF YOU'RE RELYING ON OIL, AS WE
ARE IN ALASKA, IT CAN APPEAR THE
DEMOCRATS ARE YOUR ENEMY.
THEY ARE DISTRUSTFUL OF OIL
COMPANIES.
THEY ARE DISTRUSTFUL OF RESOURCE
EXTRACTION.
>> WE DO INDEPENDENT RESEARCH --
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE,
ALASKANS ARE BEING HIT WITH AN
AVALANCHE OF POLITICAL
COMMUNICATION ON A SCALE THEY'VE
NEVER SEEN BEFORE.
>> IT'S SO ANNOYING.
NOT TO MENTION PHONE CALLS AND
INTERNET ADS --
>> Reporter: THE SIZE OF THE
BOMBARDMENT REFLECTS THE STATE
OF THE RACE.
>> LITERALLY, CONTROL OF THE
U.S. SENATE IS AT STAKE.
AND, AGAIN, I THINK WE CAN START
MOVING OUR COUNTRY IN A POSITIVE
DIRECTION IN CONTRAST TO WHERE
IT'S GONE UNDER HARRY REID,
BARACK OBAMA, AND MARK BEGGED
ICH.
>> Reporter: THAT KIND OF
ANTI-WASHINGTON TALK IS AT THE
CORE OF SULLIVAN'S CAMPAIGN.
HE SAYS HE'D BE MORE EFFECTIVE
THAN BEGICH ROLLING BACK FEDERAL
LIMITS ON OIL PRODUCTION.
>> IT'S NOT ONLY OPPORTUNITIES
FOR ALASKANS AND OUR FUTURE.
IT'S OPPORTUNITIES FOR
AMERICANTO HAVE MORE ACCESS FOR
>> Reporter: FOR TWO MONTHS,
SULVOON HAS HELD A NASHO LEAD IN
THE RACE.
AS A RESULT, BEGGED ICH IS IN
OVERDRIVE AND SOME POLLS SUGGEST
HE MAY BE CLOSING THE GAP.
HE STRESSES HE HAS GOTTEN
RESULTS FROM ALASKANS AND
KEEPING HIS DIFFERENCE FROM
OBAMA.
>> THIS IS ABOUT ALASKA.
THIS IS ABOUT THE NEXT SIX
YEARS.
>> Reporter: TO BEAT SULLIVAN,
BEGICH ?EEDZ A STRONG TURNOUT
OPERATION.
SUPPORTERS LIKE THESE UNION
WORKERS COULD BE ESSENTIAL FOR
THAT EFFORT.
>> FIGHT FOR WHAT'S IMPORTANT
FOR ALASKA.
SOMETIMES I DISAGREE WITH THE
PRESIDENT ON GUNS, ON OIL AND
GAS OSOME OTHER ISSUES HE'S
BROUGHTED FOR.
I PUSH BACK ON THEM.
I'LL FIGHT FOR WHAT'S IMPORTANT
FOR ALASKA.
MY RECORD SHOWS IT, AND I'M
PROUD OF THE THINGS WE'VE BEEN
ABLE TO DO.
>> Reporter: THE AREA OF LAND
OWNED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HERE IS LARGER THAN THE ENTIRE
STATE OF TEXAS.
THAT GIVES WASHINGTON A BIG ROLE
TO PLAY IN HOW ALASKA USES ITS
RESOURCES, AND THIS SENATE RACE
IS IN PART A DEBATE OVER THE
MERITS AND LIMITS OF FEDERAL
POWER.
REPUBLICAN POLITICAL CONSULTANT
ART HACKNEY, WHO LAUNCH AID
SUPER PAC TO SUPPORT SULLIVAN,
SAYS ALASKANS APPRECIATE FEDERAL
FUNDS BUT NOT WASHINGTON'S
CONTROL.
>> IN ALASKA, FEDERAL OVERREACH
IT IS A BAD WORD.
THE STORIES ARE LEGION THAT THE
STUPIDITY OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
AND HOW THEY IMPACT DAY-TO-DAY
LIVES IN ALASKA.
SO FEDERAL OVER-REACH IMPACTS
JUST ABOUT EVERYTHING-- RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT, RECREATION.
IT'S-- IT'S A VERY SALIENT POINT
IN HOW PEOPLE DECIDE WHAT THEY
DO AND DON'T LIKE ABOUT
GOVERNMENT.
>> NOVEMBER 4 IS ELECTION DAY
BUT WE'RE ASKING PEOPLE TO VOTE
EARLY.
>> Reporter: YOU HEAR OTHER
VIEWS FROM ALASKA'S LARGE NATIVE
POPULATION, WHICH JUST GATHERED
FOR A CONVENTION IN ANCHORAGE.
ALASKA NATIVES COMPRISE EVENLY%
OF THE POPULATION, AND THOSE WHO
IDENTIFY AS TRIBAL MEMBERS OFTEN
SEE THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AS AN
ALLY.
>> OUR SOCIETY NEEDS A STRONG
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR MANY
REASONS, BUT WHEN IT COMES TO
RELATIONS WITH INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HAS ALWAYS HAD A SPECIAL
RELATIONSHIP.
IT, BY LAW, HAS AN OBLIGATION TO
RESPECT TREATIES AND TO PROTECT
AND PRESERVE A WAY OF LIFE.
DAN SULLIVAN DOESN'T GET THAT.
>> Reporter: ALASKANS ARE
ALREADY CASTING BALLOTS, THANKS
TO ELDERLY, IN-PERSON VOTING.
THE DECISION MAY BE A NATIONAL
CLIFF HANGER.
ALASKA IS NOTORIOUS FOR CLOSE
ELECTIONS THAT TAKE DAYS TO
FULLY COUNT.
IF CONTROL OF THE SENATE DOES
REST ON ALASKA, THE COUNTRY
COULD VERY WELL HAVE ITS EYES ON
THIS RACE LONG AFTER ELECTION
DAY HAS PASSED.
LIZ RUSKIN, ALASKA PUBLIC MEDIA.
>> Ifill: AS WE REPORTED
EARLIER, THE U.S. ECONOMY
APPEARS TO BE ON THE UNPSWING,
CONSUMER CONFIDENCE AND GROWTH
UP, THE JOBLESS RATE DOWN.
VOTER SHOULD BE EMBRACING THE
OPTIMISM, RIGHT?
NOT SO MUCH. AND THAT MIGHT MEAN
BAD NEWS FOR DEMOCRATS THIS
COMING TUESDAY NIGHT.
NEWSHOUR POLITICAL DIRECTOR
DOMENICO MONTANARO JOINS ME TO
EXPLAIN WHY.
VOTERS THIS YEAR?
>> IT'S ALWAYS AT THE TOP OF THE
LIST FOR VOTERS.
WE'VE SEEN IN THE RECENT AP
POLL, 91% OF PEOPLE SAID IT WAS
AN IMPORTANT ISSUE WE FIND
VOTERS AND THEIR CONFIDENCE OF
WHAT HAPPENS BASED ON THE
ECONOMY.
BEHINDAIN WHAT IS SOME OF THESE
MORE POSITIVE SIGNS IN A LOT OF
THESE ECONOMIC INDICATORS.
>> Ifill: WE JUST HEARD THE
REPORT FROM ALASKA.
WHICH STATES WHERE THERE ARE BIG
ELECTIONS GOING ON ARE AFFECTED
THE MOST BY THE ECONOMY?
>> WE KNOW THERE ARE 28 STATES
IN THE COUNTRY WHERE THE
NATIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT-- WHERE
THE STATE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS
ACTUALLY HIGHER THAN THE
NATIOL RANATE, AND THAT'S PRETTY
FASCINATING BECAUSE OF THOSE,
THERE ARE NINE OF THE 17 MOST
COMPETITIVE SENATE RACE THAT--
WHERE THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS
HIGHER THAN THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
AND THAT CAN CUT BOTH WAYS.
WE KNOW THAT NATIONALLY, ABOUT
TWO-THIRD OF PEOPLE SAY THAT THE
COUNTRY IS HEADED OFF ON THE THE
WRONG TRACK.
ONLY ABOUT 38% SAID IN A CNN
POLL THAT THEY THOUGHT THAT THE
ECONOMY WAS DOING WELL.
AND YOU HAD ANOTHER HIGH
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE SAYING THAT
THEY REALLY FEEL LIKE THE
COUNTRY, BEING OFF ON THE WRONG
TRACK, NOT DOING VERY WELL, AND
THAT IT WOULD IMPACT DEMOCRATS
POTENTIALLY FOR THE MIDTERMS
THIS TIME AROUND BECAUSE OF THE
NATIONAL MOOD.
BUT IT CAN CUT BOTH WAYS BECAUSE
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT SOME OF THE
SPECIFIC RACES, GEORGIA, IN
PARTICULAR, 7.9% UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE, THE HIGHEST IN THE COUNTRY
OF ANYWHERE, AND YOU HAVE A
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE THERE WHO
IS REALLY STRUGGLED AIR, FORMER
C.E.O., TO TALK ABOUT HIS JOBS
MESSAGE.
>> Ifill: WHAT IF YOU'RE IN A
STATE-- WHEN I WAS IN COLORADO,
THEY ACTUALLY HAVE BETTER THAN
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE, AND YET THE
DEMOCRATIC INCUMBENT IS STILL
STRUGGLING.
>> COLORADO, IOWA, A LOT OF
THOSE PLACES.
BUT IT'S NOT ALWAYS JUST ABOUT
THE ECONOMY.
I THINK THAT'S PART OF THE
PROBLEM.
A LOT OF TIMES WE LOOK AT THE
ECONOMY, WE LOOK AT THESE
NUMBERS AND WE WANT TO THINK,
YEAH, THAT'S GOING TO MEAN THIS
OR IT'S GOING TO ABSOLUTELY
IMPACT DEMOCRATS.
A LOT OF TIMES, SENATORS DON'T
GET THE KIND OF CREDIT FOR THE
ECONOMY,  A LOT OF TIMES
GOVERNORS MORE SO ARE HELD TO
ACCOUNT FOR THIS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN ILLINOIS, YOU'RE
SEEING GOVERNOR QUINN, THE
DEMOCRAT THERE, STRUGGLING IN
THE POLLS.
GOVERNOR MALLOY IN CONNECTICUT,
A FEW DEMOCRATS WHO REALLY
SHOULDN'T BE DOING BADLY REALLY
HAVING A DIFFICULT REELECTION.
>> Ifill: HOW MUCH OF THIS IS
ABOUT THE PERCEPTION OF THE WAY
PEOPLE FEEL ABOUT THE ECONOMY
AND THE CANDIDATES THEMSELVES
WHO MAYBE AREN'T ARTICULATING
THE MESSAGE VOTERS WANT TO HEAR?
>> I THINK THAT'S A BIG PART OF
IT.
A LOT OF TIMES IF YOU'RE FEELING
LIKE THE COUNTRY IS NOT DOING
WELL OR THE ECONOMY IS NOT DOING
WELL, THEN IT WINDS UP BEING
SETHIOMNG THAT DOES TRANSLATE.
BUT THERE'S A WHOLE LOT OF OTHER
ISSUES THAT PEOPLE DO CARE ABOUT
IN THESE STATES AND IN THESE
ELECTIONS.
WE'VE BEEN SEEING IN THESE
PIECES, SO OFTEN THESE ELECTIONS
HAVE COME DUNE TO WHAT
REPUBLICANS ARE TRYING TO DO IT
NATIONALIZE THE ELECTION AND
MAKE IT ABOUT PRESENTID OBAMA,
AND THE NATIONAL POLITICAL
ENVIRONMENT.
AND DEMOCRATS TRYING TO
LOCALIZE, LIKE IN COLORADO AND
NORTH CAROLINA AND IOWA.
>> Ifill: REMEMBER IN 19 NOT
"IT'S THE ECONOMY, STUPID"
BECAME THE MANTRA AND IT TURNS
OUT THE ECONOMY WAS RECOVERING
AT THE TIME BUT GEORGE H.W. BUSH
STILL TOOK THE HIT.
>> THE ECONOMY WAS STARTING TO
RECOVER.
BUT THE PROBLEM AS WE SAID
EARLIER A LOT OF TIMES PEOPLE
KIND OF LAG BEHIND SOME OF THESE
NUMBERS AND IT'S NOT ALWAYS THE
CASE THAT THE ECONOMY IS
DEFINITELY WHAT'S THE BIGGEST
INDICATOR.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ONE OF THE
MANY TRENDS WE'LL BE WATCHING
TUESDAY NIGHT WITH YOU D SEE YOU
THEN.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A CLOSER LOOK
AT THE GROWING HUMAN TOLL EBOLA
IS TAKING ON THE COMMUNITIES OF
WEST AFRICA THE EPICENTER OF THE
CURRENT OUTBREAK.
WE HAVE TWO UPDATES FROM "NEW
YORK TIMES" REPORTERS WORKING IN
THE REGION THE FIRST IS FROM BEN
SOLOMON WHO FILED THIS VIDEO
REPORT FROM INSIDE AN EBOLA
TREATMENT CENTER.
IN THE COUNTRYSIDE EAST OF THE
LIBERIAN CAPITAL OF MONROVIA.
>> WHAT I SEE IN THE FACES OF
THE PATIENTS?
FEAR.
FEAR OF THE UNKNOWN.
RIGHT BESIDE THEM, FRIENDS DIE.
IT'S SO, SO FRIGHTENING.
IS THIS HOW I'M GOING TO END UP,
TOO?
MY JOB IS TO HELP THEM TO SEE
THAT THERE'S STILL HOPE.
HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH
>> WE SING TO BUILD UP OUR HOP
HOPES.
I'M A NURSE.
AND I WORK HERE AS A
PSYCHOSOCIAL OFFICER.
WHEN I GO IN, MOST OF THEM REFER
TO ME AS BIG SISTER.
IT'S WITHIN MY SPIRIT TO GIVE
CARE.
DO IT WITHOUT TOUCHING BUT THERE
ARE OTHER THINGS WE CAN DO,
OFFER HOPE, MAKE THEM FEEL MORE
CONFIDENCE THAT THEY CAN COME IN
HERE AND WALK OUT.
AT THE MOMENT, WE ARE
DISCHARGING PATIENTS WHO PROVED
NEGATIVE, SO WE HAD TO DISCHARGE
HER OUT.
WHAT GIVES ME THE MOST, MOST
HOPE, PEOPLE COME IN HERE SO
FRUSTRATED AND SICK, AND AFTER,
THEY WALK OUT OF HERE.
IT MAKES ME FEEL THAT I'M ABLE
TO DO SOMETHING.
IT MAKES ME HAPPY.
IT MAKES ME FEEL FULFILLED.
>> Woodruff: THAT REPORT
PREPARED BY REPORTER BEN
SOLOMON.
SHERI FINK HAS ALSO BEEN
REPORTING FROM LIBERIA FOR THE
"NEW YORK TIMES," AND SHE'S ALSO
A MEDICAL DOCTOR.
I SPOKE WITH HER A SHORT WHILE
AGO OVER SKYPE FROM MONROVIA.
SHERI FINK, WELCOME.
YOU HAVE BEEN WRITING SOME VERY
MOVING STORIES RECENTLY, THE
OVERWHELMING TRAGEDY, BUT ALSO
SOME VERY TOUGH DECISIONS THAT
THE DOCTORS HAVE TO MAKE.
TALK ABOUT THAT.
>> Reporter: YEAH, ONE OF THE
DOCTORS HERE NAMED STEVEN HATCH,
HE SPEAKS OF IT AS SOLOMONIC
DECISIONS, AND REALLY, EVERY DAY
BRINGS SOME OF THESE TOUGH
CHOICES.
EBOLA TREATMENT UNITS, IN A WAY,
THEY'RE KIND OF SIMPLE.
THEY'RE NOT A LOT OF ADVANCED
CARE THAT'S OFFERED.
IN FACT, IT'S SORT OF A
PROTOCOL.
EVERY PATIENT GETS A MIX OF
MEDICINES WHEN THEY COME IN TO
COVER THINGS LIKE, YOU KNOW, A
COINFECTION WITH SOMETHING LIKE
MALARIA.
SOMETIMES, YOU KNOW, EBOLA CAN
REDUCE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
IMMUNE SYSTEM.
SO PEOPLE EVEN GET ANTIBIOTICS,
EVEN THOUGH EBOLA IS A VIRAL
DISEASE.
SO YOU WOULD THINK IT'S SORT OF
SIMPLE-- FLUIDS AND SOME OF
THESE EXTRA MEDICINES-- BUT IN
FACT THERE ARE ALL THESE CHOICES
THAT HAVE TO BE MADE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU HAVE
SOMEBODY WHO TESTS NEGATIVE, BUT
THEN THEY DEVELOP SYMPTOMS WHILE
THEY'RE IN THE SUSPECT WARD,
WELL, THEN, YOU KNOW, IT'S
POSSIBLE THAT THEY STILL WILL
TURN POSITIVE.
SO DO YOU KEEP THEM THERE AND
POSSIBLY EXPOSE THEM TO OTHER
PEOPLE WHO HAVE EBOLA IN ORDER
TO TEST THEM AGAIN?
AND, YOU KNOW, ALL THESE
DIFFICULT CHOICES COME UP, EVEN
WITH CHILDREN.
THAT'S ANOTHER EXAMPLE, WHERE,
YOU KNOW, A PARENT TESTS
NEGATIVE AIR, CHILD TESTS
POSITIVE.
SO WHAT DO DO YOU IN THAT
SITUATION?
>> Woodruff: YOU WROTE ABOUT A
MOTHER WHO DIED, A PREGNANT
WOMAN WHO DIED AND HAD TO MAKE A
DECISION ABOUT WHAT TO DO WITH
THE INFANT WHEN IT WAS BORN.
YOU ALSO WROTE ABOUT ANOTHER
MOTHER WHO LOST AN INFANT AND
HOW SHE STRUGGLED WITH AN
INFECTION AND HER TREATMENT.
>> Reporter: YES.
I THINK THESE WERE TWO OF THE
MORE REALLY HEARTRENDING
STORIES.
I GUESS THERE ARE STORIES LIKE
THAT EVERY DAY.
AND THEY REALLY SORT OF
EMPHASIZE WHY THE DOCTORS AND
NURSES WHO I'VE BEEN CHRONICLING
FOR THE LAST FEW WEEKS, THEY
FEEL A LOT OF JOY WHEN PEOPLE
SURVIVE.
BUT THEY GET, OVER TIME, THEY
REALIZE THAT WHAT THE WORLD HAS
TO OFFER FOR PEOPLE WHO HAVE
EBOLA JUST ISN'T GIET QOOIT
THERE.
SO EVEN TAKE THE PREGNANT WOMAN.
IT TURNS OUT THAT EBOLA IS VERY
HIGHLY, YOU KNOW-- IT'S EVEN
MORE FATAL IN PEOPLE WHO ARE
PREGNANT, AND, YOU KNOW, JUST
THE TRAGEDY OF THAT ALONE.
THIS PARTICULAR WOMAN, THEY
DIDN'T KNOW IF SHE HAD EBOLA.
SHE HEMORRHAGED AFTER HAVING
SPONTANEOUS CHILDBIRTH EIGHT
MONTHS INTO HER PREGNANCY.
AND SHE WENT FROM HOSPITAL TO
HOSPITAL WHILE SHE WAS STILL
ALIVE, WHILE SHE WAS, YOU KNOW,
STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE, NO
HOSPITALS WOULD LET HER IN
BECAUSE THAT'S A KIND OF CLASSIC
PRESENTATION WITH EBOLA.
AND HIGHLY INFECTIOUS,
OBVIOUSLY, IF THERE'S BLOOD.
SO FINALLY, THE CAR WITH HER
PARENTS AND THE LADY AND HER
BABY MAKE IT TO THE EBOLA
TREATMENT UNIT, AND BY THAT
POINT, SHE HAD PASSED AWAY.
BUT THE DOCTORS AND NURSES HAD
TO STRUGGLE WITH THIS DECISION
OF WHAT DO WE DO WITH THIS
INFANT?
THEY HAD NO IDEA.
COULD THE INFANT BE POSITIVE?
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF SCIENCE
AROUND THAT OR DATA OR
INFORMATION BECAUSE WE JUST
HAVEN'T STUDIED THIS DISEASE AS
MUCH AS IT WOULD HAVE BEEN GOOD
TO DO.
SO THEY MADE THE BEST CHOICE
THEY COULD.
THEY SENT THE BABY HOME WITH THE
GRANDPARENTS, AND, YOU KNOW,
WITH GLOVES, WITH FORMULA, IN
THE HOPES THAT THEY COULD GIVE
THE CHILD A CHANCE AT SURVIVING.
THE CHILD DIED THREE DAYS LATER,
AND THEN TWO WEEKS AFTER THAT,
THE MOTHER, WHO HAD HELPED
DELIVER HER-- THE GRANDMOTHER
WHO HAD HELPED DELIVER HER
DAUGHTER'S BABY AND HAD CARED
FOR THE BABY ENDED UP COMING
DOWN WITH EBOLA AND DYING IN THE
CLINIC.
SO THESE ARE THE SORT OF-- IF
YOU STAY THERE LONG ENOUGH, YOU
SEE HOW THIS DISEASE MOVES
THROUGH FAMILIES THAT WAY.
AND, AGAIN, IT'S THOSE HIGH-RISK
CONTACTS, THE REAL CONTACT WITH
THE BODY FLUIDS THAT SEEMS TO BE
THE THEME OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: JUST TERRIBLE.
FINALLY, SHERI FINK, THE LAST
STORY YOU WROTE, DESPITE ALL
THIS STHE SURPRISINGLY LOW
NUMBERS OF PATIENTS BEING
TREATED IN THESE NEWEST
HOSPITALS AROUND MONROVIA WHERE
YOU ARE.
>> Reporter: ACTUALLY, IT
SEEMS TO BE A PATTERN ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
WE HAVE THE WITH W.H.O. SAY THEY
BELIEVE THERE'S BEEN A SLOW-DOWN
IN THE UPSURGE IN INFECTIONS.
AND THEY SESM SIZE IT'S NOT A
REASON TO PULL BACK ON ANY OF
THE PLANS BECAUSE THERE ARE
LARGE SWATHS OF THE COUNTRY THAT
DON'T HAVE TREATMENT UNITS AND
THAT'S PART OF WHAT THE U.S. IS
DOING IS TRYING TO BUILD AND
STAFF THESE TREATMENT UNITS THAT
ARE IN DISTANT PARSE OF THE
COUNTRY WHERE THERE'S NOT GREAT
SURVEILLANCE.
THERE AREN'T GOOD OPTIONS FOR
PEOPLE WHO HAVE NO ACCESS TO
CARS, NO CELL PHONE SERVICE, AND
JUST-- ALSO JUST THESE REALLY
BAD ROADS, FRANKLY.
SO RIGHT NOW, IT'S HARD FOR THEM
TO BE SAFE.
YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE A FAMILY
MEMBER WHO IS SICK.
IF YOU HAVE TO WAIT TWO DAYS TO
GET SOMEBODY TO GET THEM TO A
TREATMENT UNIT, OR IF THEY DIE,
TO HAVE A SAFE BURIAL, THAT'S
REALLY TOUGH.
SO WHAT THE NUMBERS ARE
SUGGESTING IS THERE IS SOME
POSITIVE NEWS, THAT SOME OF
THESE INTERVENTIONS THAT WE'VE
SEEN SO MUCH WORK ON IN THE LAST
FEW WEEKS AND MONTHS, MAY BE
STARTING TO SLOW THIS EPIDEMIC,
WHICH IS GREAT NEWS, BUT
CERTAINLY NOT A REASON TO LET
UP, ACCORDING TO THE EXPERTS
HERE.
>> Woodruff: SHERI FINK
REPORTING FROM THE FRT LONINES
THERE IN LIBERIA.
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANKS A LOT.
>> Ifill: CELEBRITIES, ATHLETES
AND POLITICIANS HAVE
INCREASINGLY GONE PUBLIC ABOUT
THEIR SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
BUT THE CORPORATE CLOSET HAS
MOSTLY REMAINED CLOSED.
TODAY, APPLE'S C.E.O., TIM COOK
OPENED THAT DOOR A BUT MORE,
DECLARING IN AN ESSAY FOR
BLOOMBERG BUSINESS WEEK, HE IS
GAY.
>> WHILE I HAVE NEVER DENIED MY
SEXUALITY, I HAVEN'T PUBLICLY
ACKNOWLEDGED IT EITHER, UNTIL
NOW.
SO LET ME BE CLEAR, I'M PROUD TO
BE GAY AND I CONSIDER BEING GAY
AMONG THE GREATEST GIFTS GOD HAS
GIVEN ME.
>> Ifill: COOK BECOMES THE MOST
PROMINENT BUSINESS LEADER TO
COME OUT BUT WHAT DIFFERENCE
WILL IT MAKE?
KARA SWISHER, WHO HAS LONG
COVERED THE TECH INDUSTRY AND IS
CO-EXECUTIVE EDITOR OF THE TECH
NEWS WEBSITE, RECODE, JOINS ME
NOW.
SO, KARA, IN THIS DAY AND AGE,
WHY DOES WHAT TIM COOK HAD TO
SAY MATTER?
>> WELL, HE IS THE MOST
PROMINENT EXECUTIVE IN TECH, AND
HE'S RUNNING THE MOST VALUABLE
COMPANY IN THE WORLD.
AND SO HE HAS A LOT OF
PROMINENCE, AND THIS IS A BIG
DEAL FOR HIM TO COME OUT AND SAY
THAT, AND THE FACT THAT NO
FORTUNE 500 EXECUTIVE HAS DONE
THIS IS A MILESTONE.
>> Ifill: WHY NOW?
TELL US ABOUT TIM COOK?
>> I DON'T THINK THERE WAS AN
OCCASION.
HE DIDN'T JUST DECIDE, LIKE,
WAKE UP THIS MORNING.
HE'S BEEN OUT AMONG HIS FRIENDS,
AS HE WROTE, BUT HE HAD NEVER
ACKNOWLEDGED IT IN PUBLIC, AND
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
IT IN SILICON VALLEY A LOT.
THERE WAS A LOT OF HUBBUB A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO WHEN A CNBC
EXCHANGE DISCUSSED IT.
EVERYBODY KNOWS HE'S GAY.
HE'S BEEN MOVING SLOWLY TOWARDS
IT.
HE APPEARED AT THE GAY PRIDE
FESTIVAL IN SAN FRANCISCO THIS
YEAR.
HE MADE A SPEECH RECENT ABOUT
GAY AND LESBIAN RIGHTS, RELATED
TO ALABAMA, WHERE HERE'S FROM.
SO HE'S BEEN MOVING TOWARDS IT
VERY CLEARLY.
AND AND PROBABLY HE JUST WOKE UP
AND SAID I'LL JUST ACKNOWLEDGE
IT AND SAY IT AND IT'S NOT A BIG
DEAL AND ME HOLDING BACK IS
PROBABLY A BIGGER DEAL.
>> Ifill: IT DOESN'T ROYAL THE
TECH COMMUNITY BUT HOW ABOUT THE
BROADER COMMUNITY?
>> THE iPHONE IS NOT GAY.
IT'S NOT THE PRODUCT.
IT'S PART OF HIS LIFE AND REALLY
INTERESTING.
THAT ESSAY TO ME WAS VERY
INTERESTING ESPECIALLY BECAUSE
HE MADE THE POINT HE WAS THE SON
OF THE SOUTH, HE WAS A FITNESS
NUT-- WHICH HE IS-- AND A WHOLE
BUNCH OF THINGS.
IT'S MORE THAN JUST BEING GAY,
BUT THIS IS ALSO PART OF HIM,
AND I THINK THAT IS WHAT WAS
IMPORTANT TO HIM IS ACKNOWLEDGE
IT AND TRY TO HELP PEOPLE WHO
MAY NOT BE QUITE AS BRAVE AS
HE'S BEEN TODAY.
>> Ifill: AS WE WATCHTHE
SOCIAL EVOLUTION, MARRIAGE LAWS,
AND IN THE ENTERTAINMENT WORLD,
AND YOU NAME IT, THE MILITARY
EVEN, HAS IT CHANGED THE WAY
THESE KINDS OF ANNOUNCEMENTS
RESONATE?
>> I THINK THIS IS STILL GOING
TO BE A BIG DEAL.
THIS IS A PROMINENT C.E.O. OF
THE MOST VALUABLE COMPANY ON THE
EARTH.
SO I THINK IT'S GOING TO BE ONE
OF THOSE MOMENTS THAT'S GOING TO
BE REMEMBERED HISTORICALLY.
HE'S GOING TO SAVE LIVES.
ONE OF THE ISSUES HE TALKED
ABOUT IS A LOT OF GAY AND
LESBIAN YOUTH, THEY'RE MUCH MORE
AT RISK, PEOPLE THAT WORK IN
CERTAIN STATES ARE UNDER RISK OF
BEING FIRED FOR BEING GAY.
IF HE GIVES THEM A LITTLE
COURAGE OR MOVES ALONG THE
CONVERSATION, THAT HELPS THINGS
NO MATTER WHAT AND PEOPLE WILL
BE TALKING ABOUT IT BECAUSE OF
WHO HE IS.
LIKE WHEN AN ATHLETE IN THE NFL
COMES OUT OR A GAY SENATOR OR
SOMEONE IN HOLLYWOOD COMES OUT,
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT IT AND IT
MOVES THE CONVERSATIONED FOR AND
THAT'S ALWAYS A GOOD THING.
>> Ifill: IN 29 STATES, IN
FACT, PEOPLE COULD STILL BE
FIRED FOR DOING WHAT HE DID
TODAY.
>> AND PEOPLE COULD BE KILLED
ACROSS THE WORLD.
THERE ARE COUNTRIES WHERE THEY
KILL YOU JUST FOR BEING GAY.
NOT TALKING ABOUT GAY RIGHT, BUT
EXISTING AS A GAY PERSON.
I THINK THIS IS A MUCH MORE
SERIOUS ISSUE.
APEXPEL A LOT OF TECH COMPANIES,
ESPECIALLY IBM-- PEOPLE DON'T
REALIZE THIS-- HAVE BEEN AT THE
FOREFRONT OF THESE ISSUES A
LONG, LONG TIME AND TIM HAS BEEN
THERE A LONG, LONG TIME.
STEVE JOBS SAID OUR JOB IS TO
PUT A DENT IN THE UNIVERSE-- HE
WAS TALKING ABOUT PRODUCTS AND
THING LIKE THAT-- BUT THIS PUTS
A DENT IN SOMETHING THAT NEEDS
TO BE DENTED AND DONE WITH OVER
TIME.
>> Ifill: DOESN'T TIM COOK
HAVE A REPUTATION AS KIND OF THE
BRAINS BEHIND STEVE JOBS?
>> WELL, STEVE JOBS HAD A BIG
BRAIN.
LET'S JUST BE CLEAR.
THERE ARE NO BRAINS BEHIND STEVE
JOBS.
HE WASN'T THE SPOKESMODEL FOR
APPLE.
BUT TIM HAS BEEN THE OPERATIONS
PERSON.
HE'S BEEN THE QUIET
BEHIND-THE-SCENES PERSON.
A LOT OF HIS COMING OUT PROBABLY
TOOK SOME TIME.
HE'S A MANAVE CERTAIN AGE.
HE'S VERY QUIET HIMSELF.
HE DOESN'T TALK A LOT ABOUT HIS
PERSONAL LIFE.
HE PLAYS THINGS CLOSE TO THE
VEST IN TERMS OF A LOT OF THINGS
AND THIS IS PROBABLY SOMEWHAT
DISCOMFORTING FOR HIM BECAUSE
HE'S SUCH A QUIET GUY.
I HEARD HE WAS-- HE WORKS OUT
EVERY MORNING AT 5:00 A.M. AND
HE WAS IN THE GYM AT 5 HAIM THIS
MORNING SO HE DIDN'T CHANGE MUCH
OF HIS REGULAR THINGS.
HE IS NOT SOMEONE WHO WOULD TALK
A LOT ABOUT THIS, SO IT PROBABLY
WAS VERY HARD FOR HIM TO DO
SOAD.
>> Ifill: ON THE OTHER HAND,
BEING THE C.E.O. OF APPLE AS YOU
POINTED OUT, SUCH A POWERFUL
POSITION, SOMEHOW MAKES IT
EASIER, DOESN'T MAKE IT HARDER
TO COME OUT.
>> IT'S AS YOUY'SER BECAUSE HE'S
INCREDIBLY WEALTHY, HE HAS A LOT
OF SUPPORT, HIS COMPANY, HIS
BOARD SUPPORTS HIM, EVERYBODY
HERE IN SILICON VALLEY IS HAPPY
HE HAS DONE THIS.
HE HAS SUPPORT THAT WAY.
A LOT OF EMPLOYEES WHO WORK IN
COMPANIES THAT COME OUT, THE
SITUATION IS MUCH MORE DIRE FOR
THEM.
I THINK HE WAS TRYING TO GIVE
THEM SOME COURAGE.
I DON'T THINK IT'S GOING TO GO
WRONG FOR APPLE OR TIM TO DO
THIS, BUT AT THE SAME TIME, HE
COULD POSSIBLY GIVE COURAGE TO
PEOPLE WHO MAYBE HAVE A HARDER
TIME.
THERE ARE MAYBE COMPANIES TO
REFLECT ON WHAT THEY'RE DOING TO
THEIR EMPLOYEES IF THEY HAVE--
DON'T HAVE POLICIES IN PLACE TO
PROTECT ALL PLAY PLAES.
AND AGAIN, IT'S NOT A GAY ISSUE,
IT'S A HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE.
THIS IIT'S GOOD FOR EVERYBODY.
A DIVERSE WORKPLACE IS A BETTER
WORKPLACE.
AND APPLE KNOWS THIS.
LOT OF COMPANIES HERE IN SILICON
VALLEY KNOW THIS, AND ANY
COMPANY THAT IS SUCCESSFUL KNOWS
THIS.
>> Ifill: KARA SWISHER, ALWAYS
A PLEASURE TALK TOWG, THANK YOU.
>> THANKS A LOT.
>> Woodruff: THERE ARE MOMENTS
WHEN THE POWER OF NATURE AND THE
ELEMENTS AND THE DESTRUCTION
THEY CAN CAUSE SIMPLY CAPTURE
EVERYONE'S ATTENTION AND MAKE
YOU WONDER ABOUT YOUR PLACE IN
THE UNIVERSE.
THIS WEEK, THE LAVA FLOW ON
HAWAII'S BIG ISLAND THAT'S
FORCED PEOPLE TO ABANDON HOMES.
AND A SUNSPOT THE SIZE OF PLANET
JUPITER ARE PROVIDING SUCH A
MOMENT.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS A LOOK AT
THE SCIENTIFIC PHENOMENONA
BEHIND ALL THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NATIONAL
GUARD ITSELF BEGAN TRYING TO
HELP HAWAIIANS TODAY.
THE LAVA THAT BEGAN FLOWING THIS
SUMMER FROM THE VOLCANO ON MOUNT
KILAUEA IS ENDANGERING A SMALL
COMMUNITY OF ABOUT 950
RESIDENTS.
IT MAY BE MOVING SLOWLY, AT
SPEEDS OF JUST FIVE TO TEN MILES
AN HOUR, BUT THERE'S BEEN NO WAY
TO STOP IT.
AND NOW IT'S STARTED TO BURN
HOMEOWNERS PROPERTY THERE.
AT THE SAME TIME, A WHOLE
DIFFERENT SET OF FIERY IMAGES
FROM SPACE MAY ALSO BE IN YOUR
DAILY NEWS FEED.
IT'S THE LARGEST SUNSPOT IN MORE
THAN TWO DECADES.
FEDERAL OFFICIALS HAVE WARNED
FREQUENTLY ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY
THAT SOLAR FLARES COULD
POTENTIALLY DISRUPT NAVIGATION
SYSTEMS AND RADIO FREQUENCIES.
SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT MILES
O'BRIEN IS WITH US AGAIN
TONIGHT.
MILES, LET'S START WITH THIS
PLANET FIRST.
WHEN WE THINK OF LAUGH AWE THINK
OF HUGE EXPLOSIONS AND VOLCANOS
LIKE MOUNT ST. HELENS AND OTHER
PLACES BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT HERE.
>> WITH MOUNT AINT HELENS, THE
MOST RECENT ERUPTION IN JAPAN,
WE HAD WHAT'S CALLED A
PYROPLASTIC FLOW.
THINK OF IT AS A STEAM-HEATED
RRIHUCANE.
IT CAN TRAVEL AT-- IN EXCESS OF
100 MILES PER HOUR, CARRY
BOLDERS WITH IT, AND CAN CATCH
PEOPLE OFF GUARD AS WE SAW MOST
RECENTLY IN JAPAN.
THIS IS THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
EQUATION FOR VOLCANOS, THESES
--Y LAVA VOLCANOS THAT HAVE BEEN
ERUPTING IN SORT OF SLOW MOTION,
AND THEY MOVE AND FISSURES CRACK
AND LAVA APPEARS IN DIFFERENT
PLACES.
AND WHAT WE'RE SEEING HERE NOW,
OF COURSE, IS AS THE LAVA
CHANGES ITS PATTERN, THE
PATTERNS OF HUMAN SETTLEMENT
HAVE CHANGED AS WELL.
THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE LIVING
THERE.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE COLLISION
IS RIGHT HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT SORT OF
DANGERS DOES THIS LAVA POSE, IN
TERMS OF THE GASES COMING OFF OF
IT, OR THE INFRASTRUCTURE THAT
IT THREATENS IF IT CUTS ACROSS
ROADS?
>> ALL KINDS OF TOXIC GASES
ASSOCIATED WITH VOLCANOS, FOR
DIOXIDE, MANY OTHERS, WHICH CAN
BE HAZARDOUS.
ONE THING ABOUT LAUGH A, OF
COURSE, EVEN THOUGH THIS IS KIND
OF A SLOW-MOTION TRAIN WRECK,
THERE'S NO STOPPING IT.
THERE'S NO PUTTING UP A DAM TO
STOP LAVA.
THIS IS AFTER ALL THE MOLTEN
CORE OF THE EARTH.
IT'S HOT AND THERE'S NO STOPPING
IT.
SO PEOPLE HAVE GOT TO,
UNFORTUNATELY, RESPECT THAT, AND
STEP AWAY FROM THE LAVA.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE CENTER OF THE RING OF FIRE
HERE IN THE PACIFIC.
AND, YOU KNOW, ESSENTIALLY, THE
EARTH SITS ON 17 GIANT TECTONIC
PLATES.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE SITTING ON
RIGHT NEW.
WE'RE KIND OF FLOATING ON A SEA
OF MAGMA AND WHEREVER THERE ARE
CRACKS IN PLATES, YOU GET
PROBLEMS.  YOU GET EARTHQUAKES
AND VOL CANE EXPOSE SOMETIMES
IT'S THE OOZY LAVA WE SEE IN
HAWAII.
>> Sreenivasan: WE SOMETIMES
THINK WE CAN ENGINEER OUR WAY
AROUND EVERYTHING AND WE HAVE NO
CONTROL OVER THE GIANT SUNSPOTS
WE HAVE BEEN SEEING.
THERE ARE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS
AND PEOPLE THAT STARE AT THE SUN
ALL DAY LONG, 24/7.
WHAT IS IT ABOUT WHAT'S BEEN
HAPPENING OVER THE RECENT PAST
THAT HAVE THEM SO CONCERNED?
>>, OF COURSE, WE WOULD ADVISE
PEOPLE NOT TO STARE AT THE SUN
UNLESS THEY TAKE PRECAUTIONS, OF
COURSE, BUT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
A GIANT SUN SPOT.
EQUIVALENT TO THE 20 EARTH
DIAMETERS, WHICH IS HARD TO EVEN
COMPREHEND.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN WATCHING IS
IT NOW FOR TWO WEEKS.
IT JUST DISAPPEARED.
THE SUN ROTATE ABOUT EVERY 25
DAYS ALL THE WAY AROUND.
SO FOR ABOUT TWO WEEKS, THIS
GIANT SUN SPOT IS ON THE
BACKSIDE, IF YOU WILL.
HUGE SOLAR FLARES COME OFF OF
IT.
WE HAVEN'T SEEN THE OTHER THING
THAT CAN OCCUR, WHICH IS THE
SO-CALLED CORONAL MASS EJECTION.
A GOOD ANALOGY FOR THIS IS YOU
THINK OF A CANNON SHOT.
THE FLASH IS THE SOLAR FLARE.
THE CANNONBALL ITSELF IS THE
CORONAL MASS EJECTION.
IN THIS CASE, WE'RE SEEING THE
FLASH BIT NO CANNONBALL.
IN EITHER CASE WE CAN EXPECT
DISRUPTIONS IN COMMUNICATIONS
HERE ON OUR PLANET BECAUSE WE
RELY MORE AND MORE ON
SPACE-BASED ASSETS -- SATELLITES
-- IN ORDER TO COMMUNICATE AND
RUN OUR INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT THESE
EXPLOSIONS IN PERSPECTIVE FOR
US.
ONE OF THE PLACEIZ READ, THIS IS
LIKE A BILLION OF THE NUCLEAR
POWER THAT WE DROPPED ON
HIROSHIMA.
>> IMAGINE THAT.
IT'S REALLY HARD TO COMPREHEND
IT ALL.
SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND WHY WHEN
THIS ENERGY INTERACTS WITH THE
EARTH'S MAGNETIC FIELD, IT CAN
CAUSE HAVOC WITH THE
HIGH-FREQUENCY COMMUNICATIONS
USED BY THINGS LIKE THE GPS
SYSTEM, OR FOR THAT MATTER,
THINK OF THE SATELLITE WE'RE
USING RIGHT NOW TO COMMUNICATE
WITH EACH OTHER.
IF THIS WAS IN THE MIDDLE OF A
SERIOUS SOLAR FLARE OR CORONAL
MASS EJECTION, WE MIGHT VERY
WELL BE TURNING TO SNOW RIGHT
NOW.
WE'RE VULNERABLE BECAUSE OF THE
NATURE OF OUR INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND THAT'S WHY SCIENTISTS
CAREFULLY WATCH THIS.
THERE ACTUALLY IS A FAIRLY
SOPHISTICATED SPACE FORECASTING
CAPABILITY OUT THERE.
SO THE POWER GRIDS AND THE
SATELLITE OPERATORS CAN, IF THEY
HAVE TO, GO IN TO SAFE MODE.
INCIDENTALLY, THERE ARE
RESIDENTS ON BOARD OF
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION,
WHICH IN SOME CASES MIGHT HAVE
TO TAKE SHELTER IF CORONAL MASS
EJECTION WAS HEADED OUR WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: HOPEFULLY A
CORONAL MASS EJECTION DOES NOT
INTERRUPT THIS SEGMENT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> Ifill: NOW, A PRIZE-WINNING
PLAY ABOUT THE IMPACT FARAWAY
CONFLICTS HAVE ON PERSONAL
LIVES.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR REPORT
FROM OUR NEW YORK STUDIO.
>> I'M SITTING IN NIGH OFFICE.
I'M RED LINING A CONTRACT DUE AT
6:00.
STEVEN WALKS IN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN WE FIRST
MEET THE PLAYER IN THE SPACE, AN
UP AND COMING CORPORATE LAWYER,
EXPENSIVE APARTMENT ON
MANHATTAN'S UPPER EAST SIDE, AND
BEAUTIFUL ARTIST WIFE.
HE'S A PAKISTANI AMERICAN WHO
HAS LARGELY TURNED HIS BACK ON
THE RELIGION OF HIS PARENTS,
ISLAM.
BUT HE'S ALSO LIVING IN
POST-9/11 AMERICA AND
UNDERSTANDS AND EVEN PLAYS WITH
THE REALITIES OF THAT.
AT A DINNER PARTY HE EXPLAINS TO
FRIEND HOW HE VOLUNTEERS FOR
TECURITY CHECKS AT AIRPORS.
>> I KNOW THEY'RE LOOKING AT ME,
SO I FIGURE WHY NOT MAKE ITARIES
FOR EVERYONE INVOLVED?
>> I'VE NEVER HEARD OF ANYBODY
DOING THAT BEFORE.
>> ON TOP OF PEOPLE BEING MORE
AND MORE AFRAID OF FOLKS WHO
LOOK LIKE ME, WE END UP BEING
RESENTED, TOO.
>> THOSE AGENTS ARE WORKING LARD
NOT TO DISCRIMINATE, AND HERE'S
THIS DWIERK HE WALKS RIGHT UP TO
THEM AND CALLS THEM OUT ON IT.
>> PURE, UNMITIGATED, PASSIVE
AGGRESSION.
>> Brown: THERE'S PLENTY OF
HUMOR IN "DISGRACED" BUT QUITE A
BIT MORE PAIN AS AMIR'S WORLD
AND IDENTITY COMES UNDONE.
THE WRITER IS 43-YEAR-OLD AYAD
AKHTAR, A MILWAUKEE NATIVE WHO
GREW UP IN A SECULAR MUSLIM
FAMILY.
>> I DON'T EXPECT YOU OR YOUR
FRIENDS TO UNDERSTAND WHAT I'M
TALKING ABOUT.
>> Reporter: HE'S EXPLORED
VARIOUS FLASHPOINTS OF
CONTEMPORARY LIFE AS A NOVELIST,
ACTOR, AND SCREENWRITER AS IN
THE 2005 MOVIE "THE WAR WITHIN"
ABOUT A PAKISTANI STUDENT WHO
AFTER BEING ABDUCTED AND
INTERROGATED BY THE C.I.A.,
ATTEMPTS AN ATTACK ON NEW YORK.
PREMIERING TWO YEARS ANOTHER
"DISGRACED" EARNED AKHTAR THE
2013 PULITZER PRIZE, JUST BEFORE
OPENING NIGHT LAST WEEK ON
BROADWAY, I ASKED HIM WHAT HE
WAS AFTER IN WRITING THE PLAY.
>> THERE WAS A CHARACTER WHO WAS
SPEAKING TO ME WITH THIS KIND OF
RELENTLESS PASSION, AMIR, THE
LEAD CHARACTER IN THE PLAY, WHO
HAS THIS VERY PARTICULAR POINT
OF VIEW ON ISLAM.
HE'S MUSLIM, OF BIRTH AND
ORIGIN, BUT HAS SORT OF STRONGLY
MOVED AWAY FROM IT IS VERY
CRITICAL OF ISLAM.
BUT HE CAME TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
THE PLAY WAS TRYING TO GET AT IS
THE WAY WE SECRETLY CONTINUE TO
HOLD ON TO OUR TRIBAL
IDENTITIES, OUR IDENTITIES OF
BIRTH, OF EDUCATION, DESPITE O
OUR-- DESPITE GETTING MORE
ENLIGHTENED.
>> Brown: THERE'S ALMOST A
SUGGESTION THAT WHATEVER WE DO,
OUR EDUCATION, OR OUR JOBS OR OR
MARRIAGES, WE CAN'T-- WE NEVER
GET PAST THIS KIND OF TRIBAL
ALLEGIANCES.
>> I DID NOT SEEM TO BE ABLE TO
PULL THE PLAY AWAY FROM THAT
CONCLUSION.
I TRIED TOP OPINION BUT THESE
CHARACTERS CONTINUED TO FIND
MEANING AND FIND SOME KIND OF
SAFETY AS THE SITUATION, THE
DRAMATIC SITUATION DEVOLVED, IN
THOSE TRIBAL IDENTITIES.
>> Brown: AS DRAMA UNFOLDS,
AMIR MOVES FRAY SHARP CRITIQUE
OF ISLAM TO ADMITTING FEELINGS
OF SYMPATHY TO A WORLD VIEW HE
REJECTED.
>> ARE YOU TELLING ME YOU NEVER
FELT ANYTHING LIKE THAT,
UNEXPECTED, BLUSH OF--
>> NO.
NO.
I DON'T FE ANYELTHING LIKE A
BLUSH.
>> WHEN YOU HEAR ABOUT ISRAEL
THROWING ITS MILITARY WEIGHT
AROUND?
>> I AM CRITICAL OF ISRAEL, A
LOT OF JEWS ARE.
>> AND WHEN YOU HEAR ABOUT AUK
MADIN JATALKED ABOUT WIPING
ISRAEL INTO THE MEDITERRANEAN,
HOW DO YOU FEEL DID BTHAT?
>> OUTRAGE LIKE EVERYONE ELSE.
>> NOT EVERYONE FEELS OUTRAGED.
A LOT OF FOLKS LIKE HEARING
THAT.
>> Brown: HOW MUCH OF THIS DID
REFLECT YOUR OWN SENSE OF
AMERICANNESS, ISLAM, BEING A
MUSLIM, SENSE OF IDENTITY?
>> IT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I THINK IT'S ONE I'M STILL
GRAPPLING WITH AND WORKING
THROUGH IN A SERIES OF WORKS
THAT "DISGRACED" IS ONE OF.
AND I THINK THERE'S A LONG
HISTORY OF SORT OF POSTCOLONIAL
MUSLIM SELF-DEFINITION.
I WOULD SAY THE LAST 200 YEARS,
WHERE DEFINING ONES IN
OPPOSITION TO THE WEST OR
SEPARATE FROM THE WEST HAS BEEN
AN IMPORTANT PART OF WHAT IT
MEANS TO CALL ONESSELF MUSLIM.
I THINK IN THE PAST DECKATE OR
SO THERE HAS BEEN SUCH
TREMENDOUS POLITICAL UPHEAVAL,
THERE'S A WAY THAT'S BEEN CALLED
INTO QUESTION.
>> Brown: AT A PERSONAL LEVEL?
>> AT A PERSONAL LEVEL, AT A
NATION STATE LEVEL.
IT'S BEEN CALLED INTO QUESTION.
ALL THE EXTRAORDINARY CONFLICTS
WE HAVE SEEN UNFOLDING IN THE
MIDDLE EAST ARE PART AND PARCEL
OF WHAT I'M TALKING ABOUT.
SO THE WORK THAT I'M DOING,
"DISGRACED" INCLUDED, IS ABOUT
EXPLORING THE VARIOUS
CONTRADICTIONS THAT ARISE
BECAUSE OF THAT HISTORY AND
THOSE FRAILTIES.
>> Brown: OF BEING A MUSLIM IN
AMERICA AFTER 9/11?
WELL, IN PART BEING MUSLIM.
BEING AMERICAN.
WHAT ARE THE OVERLAPS?
WHAT ARE THE CONTRADICTIONS?
ARE THOSE CONTRADICTIONS REAL?
ARE THEY HISTORICAL?
ARE THEY PASSED SIMPLY FROM
PARENT TO CHILD OR IS IT
SOMETHING MUCH LARGER?
IS THERE AN INHERENT CONFLICT
BETWEEN ISLAM AND THE WEST?
>> Brown: AND HAVE YOU FIGURED
THIS OUT, OR IS THIS WHAT YOU'RE
DOING IN THE WORK?
>> I THINK TO HAVE AN ANSWER
WOULD BE ABOVE MY PAY GRADE.
I GET AWAY WITH TRYING TO SEE
WHAT THE VARIOUS PERSPECTIVES
YIELD IN TERMS OF HUMAN LIVES,
AND THE SOLUTIONS THAT
INDIVIDUALS COME UP WITH TO
THESE QUESTIONS.
>> Brown: I WONDER JUST HOW
YOU SEE THEATER AS A KIND OF
PROVOCATION, YOU KNOW?
AS SOMETHING THAT MAKES US THINK
A LOT.
THIS IS A KIND OF PROVOCATIVE
PIECE OF WRITING.
>> IT IS, AND I THINK THAT AT
ITS BEST, WHAT THE THEATER DOES
IS IT GATHERS US TOGETHER.
WE, SOCIAL HERDING ANIMALS,
ARRIVE TOGETHER INTO A ROOM AND
BEHOLD SOMETHING THAT ACTUALLY
HAPPENS BEFORE US, NOT SOMETHING
MEDIATED TO US BY A SCREEN, BUT
THE PRESENCE OF LIVE PERFORMERS
WHICH HARKENS BACK TO A KIND OF
EXPERIENCE OF A RITUAL, AND AN
EXPERIENCE OF ONE MIND, ONE
BODY, KIND OF COMMUNION THAT
HAPPENS IN THE AUDIENCE BETWEEN
AUDIENCE AND PERFORMERS THAT
ALLOWS US, REACHES INTO US,
WHERE WE CAN EXPERIENCE THINGS
MORE DEEPLY THAN WE CAN
INDIVIDUALLY.
>> Brown: EVEN IF IT'S
PROVOKING QUESTIONS OF REAL
IDENTITY-- AM I A MUSLIM?
AM I A JEW?
AM I AN AMERICAN?
WHO AM I?
>> THOSE SOUND LIKE SOME PRETTY
GOOD QUESTIONS FOR OUR TIME.
SO I DON'T MIND DOING THAT.
>> Brown: THE PLAY IS
"DISGRACED."
AYAD AKHTAR, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, JEFFREY.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
SECRETARY OF STATE KERRY SAID,
HE IS VERY CONCERNED ABOUT NEW
CLASHES IN JERUSALEM AND HE
APPEALED FOR RESTRAINT.
STREET BATTLES BROKE OUT AFTER A
GUNMAN WOUNDED A JEWISH ACTIVIST
AND POLICE KILLED A PALESTINIAN
SUSPECT.
AND THE U.S. ECONOMY TURNED IN
ANOTHER SOLID SHOWING IN THE
SECOND QUARTER, GROWING AT AN
ANNUAL RATE OF 3.5%.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, MEET A PASTOR WHO'S
FEEDING THE HOMELESS, AND
BRIDGING COMMUNITIES IN ST.
PAUL, MINNESOTA.
YOU CAN WATCH HER STORY FROM OUR
PARTNERS AT RELIGION AND ETHICS
WEEKLY ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, AN INSIDERS LOOK AT
HOW ONE U.S. HOSPITAL IS
PREPARING FOR POSSIBLE EBOLA
ADMISSIONS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE CONTINUE OUR 2014 ELECTION
COVERAGE WITH MARK SHIELDS AND
DAVID BROOKS TOMORROW NIGHT.
WITH LIVE PROGRAMMING ALL NIGHT
ELECTION NIGHT, BOTH ONLINE AND
ON AIR, AND WITH A SPECIAL
RESULTS BROADCAST AT 11:00 P.M.
EASTERN.
YOU CAN WATCH OUR SPECIAL PBS
NEWSHOUR ELECTION EDITION ON
MOST OF THESE PBS STATIONS.
CHECK YOUR LOL LICASTINGS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.